JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
DONALD TRUMP (R), President of
the United
States: Together, we will
determine the course
of America and the world for
many, many years
to come.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The United States
has a new
commander in chief.
Donald J. Trump is sworn in as
the 45th president.
Mark Shields, David Brooks, Amy
Walter and
others join me to analyze events
of this Inauguration
Day, as the nation's political
power shifts.
Plus: Protesters clash with
police.
Scores are arrested, as some
encounters across
the capital city turn chaotic.
ROBBY DIESU, DisruptJ20: The
point is to set
a tone of resistance from the
first moment
that he's in office.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: It's official.
Donald J. Trump is the 45th
president of the
United States.
Chief Justice John Roberts
administered the
oath at noon, as Mr. Trump
assumed his first
public office.
Here is how this Inauguration
Day unfolded.
For Donald and Melania Trump,
the first public
appearance of this inaugural day
came at a
morning church service at St.
John's Episcopal
in Washington.
The president-elect had already
begun his
day around 4:30 a.m. with a
trademark tweet.
It proclaimed: "The movement
continues.
The work begins."
Meanwhile, at the White House,
the outgoing
president left the traditional
note for his
successor on his Oval Office
desk.
BARACK OBAMA, Former President
of the United
States: Good morning, everybody.
MAN: Good morning, sir.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And he took a
final nostalgic
stroll next to the Rose Garden.
BARACK OBAMA: Mr.
President-Elect, how are
you?
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Obamas then
welcomed the
Trumps for a reception of coffee
and tea,
before motorcading to the U.S.
Capitol.
Thousands had already gathered
there despite
a light rain and tight security,
having faced
protests at several security
checkpoints,
as police in riot gear battled
demonstrators
elsewhere in the city.
Overall, the crowd on the
National Mall appeared
well short of the one that
celebrated Mr.
Obama's first inauguration.
More than 60 congressional
Democrats boycotted
the ceremony.
But other dignitaries filled the
West Front
of the Capitol, including former
Presidents
Jimmy Carter, George W. Bush,
and Bill Clinton,
with his wife, former Secretary
of State Hillary
Clinton, who lost the November
election to
Mr. Trump.
"Hail to the Chief" played a
final time for
President Obama.
ANNOUNCER: Ladies and gentleman,
the president-elect
of the United States, Donald
John Trump.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JUDY WOODRUFF: And then the
president-elect
himself was announced, to
cheers.
Still, the political divisions
laid bare in
the election were on display.
Scattered jeering greeted Senate
Minority
Leader Chuck Schumer when he
addressed the
crowd.
SEN.
CHUCK SCHUMER (D-NY), Minority
Leader: We
face threats, foreign and
domestic.
In such times, faith in our
government, our
institutions and even our
country can erode.
Despite these challenges, I
stand here today
confident in this great country
for one reason:
you, the American people.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The crowd cheered
again when
Supreme Court Justice Clarence
Thomas administered
the oath of office to Vice
President Pence.
CLARENCE THOMAS, Associate
Justice of the
U.S. Supreme Court: Would you
raise your right
hand and repeat after me?
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Mormon
Tabernacle Choir
performed "America the
Beautiful."
DONALD TRUMP (R), President of
the United
States: I, Donald John Trump, do
solemnly
swear...
JUDY WOODRUFF: And the nation's
45th president
took the oath of office,
administered by Chief
Justice John Roberts.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The new president
was greeted
by trumpets and cannon salutes
and by scattered
shouts of "Not my president."
Then, as the rain resumed,
Donald Trump delivered
his first address as president,
a message
of economic populism that
portrayed a nation
struggling.
DONALD TRUMP: For too many of
our citizens,
a different reality exists,
mothers and children
trapped in poverty in our inner
cities, rusted-out
factories scattered like
tombstones across
the landscape of our nation, an
education
system flush with cash, but
which leaves our
young and beautiful students
deprived of all
knowledge, and the crime and the
gangs and
the drugs that have stolen too
many lives
and robbed our country of so
much unrealized
potential.
This American carnage stops
right here and
stops right now.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Instead, the
president declared
a new vision will now guide the
government,
in his words, only America
first.
DONALD TRUMP: I will fight for
you with every
breath in my body, and I will
never, ever
let you down.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
DONALD TRUMP: America will start
winning again,
winning like never before.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
DONALD TRUMP: We will bring back
our jobs.
We will bring back our borders.
We will bring back our wealth.
And we will bring back our
dreams.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And he made clear
he will hold
official Washington to account
for past failures,
and future progress.
DONALD TRUMP: We will no longer
accept politicians
who are all talk and no action,
constantly
complaining, but never doing
anything about
it.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
DONALD TRUMP: The time for empty
talk is over.
Now arrives the hour of action.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
DONALD TRUMP: So, to all
Americans in every
city near and far, small and
large, from mountain
to mountain, from ocean to
ocean, hear these
words.
You will never be ignored again.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
DONALD TRUMP: Your voice, your
hopes, and
your dreams will define our
American destiny.
Together, we will make America
strong again.
We will make America wealthy
again.
We will make America proud
We will make America safe again.
And, yes, together, we will make
America great
again.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
DONALD TRUMP: Thank you.
God bless you.
And God bless America.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The ceremony
concluded with
the national anthem sung by
16-year-old Jackie
Evancho.
And with the peaceful transition
of power
complete, the new administration
bid farewell
to the past.
William Brangham picks it up
there.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The first task
for the newly
sworn president and vice
president, seeing
their predecessors off.
After a final hug, former Vice
President Biden
and his wife, Jill, hopped into
a waiting
motorcade, and took an Amtrak
train home to
Wilmington, Delaware.
JOSEPH BIDEN, Former Vice
President of the
United States: Hey, guys.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The Obamas
boarded a military
helicopter for the short trip to
Joint Base
Andrews in Maryland.
There, Mr. Obama addressed
hundreds of staffers
from his White House years.
BARACK OBAMA: This has been the
privilege
of my life, and I know I speak
for Michelle
as well.
And we look forward to
continuing this journey
with all of you.
And I can't wait to see what you
do next.
And I promise you I will be
right there with
you.
All right?
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: And, with
that, the former
first couple flew to Palm
Springs, California,
for a vacation.
Back in the city, a new, more
violent protest
broke out, with dozens arrested.
But, at the Capitol, the
business of the day
went ahead without interruption.
In his first official acts,
President Trump
signed a proclamation calling
for a national
day of patriotism on September
11.
He also formally submitted his
Cabinet nominations
to the Senate, and signed a
waiver that clears
the way for his defense
secretary pick, retired
General James Mattis.
From there, the Trumps entered
Statuary Hall
for the traditional
post-inaugural luncheon
and a presidential gesture to
his defeated
opponent.
DONALD TRUMP: I was very
honored, very, very
honored, when I heard that
President Bill
Clinton and Secretary Hillary
Clinton was
coming today.
And I think it's appropriate to
say.
(APPLAUSE)
DONALD TRUMP: And I would like
you to stand
up.
I would like you to stand up.
(APPLAUSE)
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Then it was
back outside
for a ceremonial review of the
troops, and
the trip down Pennsylvania
Avenue, from the
Capitol to the White House.
Protests continued, but the
parade proceeded
without interruption.
Along the way, the president got
out to greet
supporters.
As the afternoon turned into the
evening,
the first family watched the
parade from the
White House viewing box.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
William Brangham.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, our John Yang
was on the
platform on the West Side of the
Capitol for
today's ceremony.
John, you had a view most of us
didn't.
JOHN YANG: That's right, Judy.
We were right there next to it.
It was really interesting to
watch.
It was a fascinating day.
It was full of tradition.
It seemed like any other
inaugural, but, at
the same time, it was different,
the heckling
during the administering of the
oath that
you talked about.
And you had the former living --
the living
former presidents, all except
George Herbert
Walker Bush, who is hospitalized
in Houston,
all there, all there to -- I
think especially
because of the contentious
nature of this
election, there to see the
transfer of power.
But, at the same time, they
didn't seem very
enthusiastic about the speech.
George W. Bush hardly applauded
at all during
the speech, looked rather
stony-faced.
And when a reporter asked him
afterward what
he thought of the speech, his
reply was, "Good
to see you again" -- Judy.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, John -- so,
John, we reported
that the new president has
already signed
some executive orders.
A lot of it is routine, but some
of it significant.
What are you learning about what
he plans
to do in the first few days he's
in office?
JOHN YANG: There is going to be
a lot of activity.
You're going to see a lot of
executive orders
signed in the first week,
starting Monday,
we're told by Sean Spicer, the
new White House
press secretary.
Those will be more substantive,
dealing with
policy.
We're told that immigration
certainly will
be at the top of the list, trade
issues, sort
of the issues that he ran on
that were the
signatures of his campaign.
A lot of them will be undoing
what President
Obama did over the past eight
years with executive
actions, because he faced
obstacles in Congress.
A lot of it will be furthering
their own agenda.
But they say they have got a
plan, an action
plan, not just for the first 100
days, but
for the first 200 days.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Sounds like
enough to keep
you and the rest of the press
following this
new president really busy.
John Yang, thank you.
So, what to make of this day one
of the Trump
presidency?
Here with me now are "NewsHour"
regulars syndicated
columnist Mark Shields and New
York Times
columnist David Brooks, and from
our politics
Monday team, Amy Walter of The
Cook Political
Report.
Also joining us, Barry Bennett.
He was campaign manager for Ben
Carson in
the Republican primaries.
He then served as an adviser to
the Trump
campaign.
From George Washington
University, politics
scientist Lara Brown.
Karine Jean-Pierre, she was a
senior adviser
to MoveOn.org during the 2016
elections.
And Matt Schlapp, he is chair of
the American
Conservative Union.
He joins us from downtown
Washington.
We can see the Capitol behind
you, Matt.
So, let me start with the
"NewsHour" regulars,
Mark Shields and David Brooks.
David, I will start with you.
What is the main takeaway from
this day?
DAVID BROOKS: I feel
underdressed.
(LAUGHTER)
(CROSSTALK)
MARK SHIELDS: You have got that
blue-collar
Republican look.
DAVID BROOKS: It's the new
populist moment.
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: The story of the
day was the
really unabashed populism and
nationalism
of the Trump speech.
And so I'm left with two big
questions: How
big is this nationalist moment?
It's been spread around the
world.
Theresa May just gave an anti --
how they're
going to withdraw from Brexit,
the U.K. Le
Pen is looking good in France.
Putin is riding high.
There's an international
movement.
A lot of sort of dismiss as sort
of a product
of a receding bit of history,
but maybe it's
the 21st century.
And maybe Trump is riding
something, and he
will be able to marshal a
left-right populist
movement.
That's a possibility we should
be open to,
especially because the
anti-populists, people
who believe in global trade and
global movements,
have no guts, no articulation,
and really
no opposition.
And then the second thing, how
is he going
to turn this into policy?
How does an outsider who runs
against Washington
actually rally Washington to
launch his agenda?
That's just a gigantic
challenge.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mark Shields?
MARK SHIELDS: In 1940, there
were 137 million
people in the United States of
America and
-- 132 million -- and there were
600,000 more
factory jobs than there are
today.
There were eight million more
factory jobs
in this country than when Jimmy
Carter was
president of the United States.
So, Donald Trump represents a
real grievance,
a real constituency.
But what I could not get over in
the speech
today -- and I don't know what
the global
impact or meaning is, but I do
know that it
was unlike any inaugural address
I have ever
heard.
It was a call to arms to those
already enlisted
in his army.
There was no attempt to reach
across the divide.
There was no attempt to heal
wounds.
There was no attempt to reassure
or allay
fears of those who were
apprehensive and not
supported him.
So, in that sense, it was almost
unique, at
least in the speeches I have
heard.
And it was an unbridled attack
upon those
presidents spoke of who were --
in William's
piece who were sitting on the
dais with him,
having praised the Obamas in one
sentence
for being magnificent, and then
saying that
this small group who have
profited in Washington
have been indifferent, and
almost cruelly
so, to the rest of the country.
So, I just stand in the midnight
in America,
American carnage, which is, I
think, soon-to-be
canceled TV series, but I just
have never
heard language quite like it or
a tone quite
like it in an inaugural address.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Matt Schlapp,
since you're
so well-dressed, I'm going to
call on you
next.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: What did you
hear?
What are you taking away?
MATT SCHLAPP, Former White House
Director
of Political Affairs: Boy, I
just -- what
I would say to Mark is, is that
I think one
of the things that was ironic
is, you had
Donald Trump up on that dais,
who hasn't been
a Republican for very long, and
who is basically
a function of the fact that both
those parties
and many of those party leaders
and some of
those former presidents didn't
listen to the
American people.
President Obama will leave
office with higher
approval ratings, but still
two-thirds of
this nation believe that we're
on the wrong
track.
And I think the demonstration of
the economic
pain and the unrest and unease
about what's
happening overseas is high.
And, really, what struck me
about the address,
about the speech is that he is
connecting
to the political moment.
The political moment is not
about morning.
It's about -- a little bit about
M-O-U-R-N-I-N-G,
and the fact that there is
nothing wrong with
a Republican connecting to the
fact that a
lot of Americans are hurting.
Now, I agree you have to offer
solutions and
you have to be optimistic and
you have to
lead them someplace, but it's
important to
listen to them and to connect to
them.
And that's why Donald Trump is
the president.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Amy Walter?
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political
Report: Yes.
And to Matt's point, there was a
lot of Donald
Trump on the campaign trail
where he seemed
to switch positions.
We really didn't know -- and I
still think
we don't know -- where exactly
his ideological
core is.
But there was one thing that was
consistent
throughout.
It's the same message we saw
today in his
inaugural speech was the message
that we saw
on the campaign trial, was the
message that
we saw at the convention.
That has never changed at all.
It's what won him the
nomination, when nobody
thought he was going to be able
to do that.
And it's what won him the
presidency, when,
quite frankly, even going into
the election
night, nobody really believed
that he was
going to be able to win this.
And so he is taking that same
message and
he is going to bring it to the
White House
with him.
This was something that he
truly, you know,
as I said, has stuck with
throughout the course
of his campaign.
And he believes that, if he
succeeds, other
people are going to join.
The reaching out is not about
reaching out
to say, well, I'm going to take
other people's
opinions and views.
It's, I'm going to do so well,
I'm going to
be so -- we're going to make
America so great,
that people who oppose me now
are going to
have to come on board.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is that what's
going to happen,
Karine Jean-Pierre, somebody who
worked against
his election?
KARINE JEAN-PIERRE, Democratic
Strategist:
Yes, look, it was -- and I said
this before
-- it was very disappointing.
It was a right-wing nationalism
speech.
It was very reminiscent of the
RNC convention
speech, when he accepted his
nomination, had
that dooms and glooms type of
feel.
And I think the most
disappointing part of
it was, there are people here
who are genuinely
fearful because of the type of
campaign that
he ran and the people that he
insulted.
And he didn't do anything to
mend those wounds.
And, as president, that's what
people look
to our leader to do.
And I think he missed a really
important opportunity
as we were going through the
peaceful transfer
of power.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Barry Bennett,
missed an opportunity?
BARRY BENNETT, Former Trump
Campaign Senior
Adviser: I don't think so.
I think beauty is in the eye of
the beholder
here.
His supporters, me included, we
don't want
to half-a-loaf, right?
We want him to fight.
And today was the beginning of a
fight.
It wasn't the end of a campaign.
We're going to see from the left
the protests
are big and energetic, and they
are going
to be so tomorrow.
But we want him to fight back.
And I think what we saw today
was, Monday
morning, the fight is still
going to be there.
And that's what we -- I think
the country
needs.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Should people be
fearful, as
Karine was just saying?
BARRY BENNETT: I don't think so,
no.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You shake your
head no.
BARRY BENNETT: No.
I mean, I think no.
There are people here illegally.
They should be fearful that
they're here illegally,
because, you know, they should
be deported.
Or, you know, the law says they
should be
deported.
But, I mean, if you're here
illegally, of
course you're not going to be
deported.
That's silly.
That's fear-mongering.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We are looking at
-- we have
been interspersing our
conversation with pictures
of that inaugural parade still
going on an
hour after sunset here in
Washington, but
it's still going on, members of
the Trump
family seated at that reviewing
stand just
literally right in -- built
right in front
of the White House.
We're watching that.
We're keeping half-an-eye on the
parade, but
we also really want to hear what
everybody
here has to say.
Lara Brown, it is dark at the
White House,
but Donald Trump is going to
bring light to
America.
(LAUGHTER)
LARA BROWN, Director, George
Washington University
Graduate School of Political
Management: Well,
I think that that's precisely
the problem.
Maybe he is going to continue to
bring the
fight to Washington, but there
was no acknowledgment
that he had won.
His party has won.
One of the most important
aspects of an inaugural
speech is to actually end the
campaign, to
move beyond the campaign, to
bring about a
sense of reconciliation and
unity with all
of those who fought fiercely
against you.
And I think there is also this
other piece
where he failed to recognize his
moment in
history.
He didn't acknowledge past
presidents, those
who are sort of lions in the
pantheon of presidents,
whether it's Thomas Jefferson,
or Abraham
Lincoln, or George Washington.
He didn't notice or witness the
ceremony as
being important in history.
You know, Bill Clinton, who came
to office
with only 43 percent of the
popular vote,
began his speech by talking
about how this
speech takes place in the dead
of winter,
but that part of the words and
the faces of
the people are about forcing the
spring, that
there is a sense of renewal.
And Trump didn't provide that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Matt Schlapp, and
we should
say the reason you are dressed
up is because
you are going to one of the
inaugural balls.
And I failed to point that out
earlier.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Or maybe...
MATT SCHLAPP: No, I think it --
Judy, I think
it's because they think people
like me live
like Thurston Howell III.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: What about Lara
Brown's point,
though, that we didn't hear from
the new president...
MATT SCHLAPP: Right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: ... a connection
to history,
to his place in the grand
pantheon that is
the history of the United
States?
MATT SCHLAPP: Look, if you want
poetry, there
was another candidate for you.
Donald Trump was the candidate
of very blunt,
realistic talk.
And I think, if you look through
what politicians
tend to do -- and, obviously, I
worked for
President George W. Bush in the
White House,
with Barry Bennett's wife, I
might say.
And there is definitely thought,
great thought
that goes into these speeches.
But so many times, what the
voters -- what
the voter hears and then what
they see in
their lives, there can be a bit
of phoniness,
obviously, to politics.
And I think what Donald Trump
did, I think
what everyone on the panel is
failing to understand
is that I think the biggest part
of the speech
was that he broke it down in
very basic terms
for them, and he made a pledge
to them.
He said he's going to fight for
them, and
he's not going to let them down.
Boy, it's not a small pledge.
This is a high bar, to me, which
is he's going
to change, literally change
society and change
the way government does these
things.
And I think that it was bold for
him to do
that.
And I think there was a lot of
people -- I
will tell you, I talked to a lot
of people
out on the street today, and
they just like
the fact there is an
authenticity and a directness.
We will see how it works over
the years, but
I think it's very promising.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David Brooks,
bold and authentic.
DAVID BROOKS: Utopian.
He's going to eradicate disease.
He literally said that.
So, I think it was authentic.
And I do think it was bold, a
bold -- boldest
mostly on its attack on the
Republican Party.
It's a party that has always --
never believed
in zero sum thinking.
It started as the Whig Party,
which was based
on the idea in part that labor
and capital
didn't have to fight.
There was enough for all of us
in the growing
pie.
The Republican Party, through
all its permutations,
has basically believed in that.
Since the Cold War, it's
believed in growth
abroad is good for growth at
home, democracy
abroad is good for democracy at
home.
That's not an America-first
philosophy.
That's not the zero-sum
philosophy that we
heard from Donald Trump.
That's not the combative
philosophy we heard
from Donald Trump.
So, it's a stark and a bold
attempt to reshape
his own party.
Whether he can successfully do
that, I'm,
frankly, dubious about.
And whether he can successfully
effect change
in government, when he's so
anti-institutional
and not even willing to embrace
the institution
of the presidency, it's --
again, I'm dubious
about.
But bold, I give him credit for.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mark Shields,
just quickly,
did you hear signs, signals --
did you signals
today that Donald Trump will be
able to make
the changes he says he's going
to make?
MARK SHIELDS: No, I didn't.
I didn't see anything unifying
or uplifting
in this speech.
And I think that successful
inaugurals in
the past -- I mean, they may be
writing a
new chapter, but I didn't -- I
thought that
was missing from the speech.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But you're saying
that's what
we should be judging the speech
on?
MARK SHIELDS: Well, I think you
have to view
the speech as identifying
yourself in history,
acknowledging who you are,
acknowledging humility,
acknowledging the importance of
the country
and its diversity and its
strength through
that diversity, and your appeal
to the people
who didn't support you and your
pledge to
them.
And I just -- to me, it's
politics 101.
I mean, he was playing to his
base.
He's continuing to play to his
And if Matt isn't too busy going
to his nighttime
affairs, he could tell us who
the candidate
of poetry was in 2016.
(LAUGHTER)
MARK SHIELDS: Was that Rick
Perry?
Did I miss it?
Or was it Scott Walker?
I missed it.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: I wish we -- do
you want to
answer that, just quickly?
MATT SCHLAPP: It wasn't Hillary
Clinton.
It definitely wasn't Hillary
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: We will bring you
back on.
You can answer that.
I won't put you on the spot.
We have only got about a minute
left.
Amy, I'm hearing two very
different sets of
views here about what Donald
Trump accomplished
or didn't today.
AMY WALTER: If his goal was to
-- and it's
been his goal from the entire
course of this
campaign.
He has a vision and a message
about shaking
up Washington.
He's going to do things
differently.
He's not going to do it in a
traditional manner.
He doesn't care about the
trappings of this.
And you either believe that or
you don't believe
that.
And he will be successful based
on a Washington
working for him, despite the
fact that he
doesn't think Washington works.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, we have how
many days,
365 times four, to talk about
what he accomplished
today and what he may accomplish
in the future.
I want to thank each one of you,
Mark Shields,
David Brooks, Amy Walter, Lara
Brown, Karine
Jean-Pierre, Barry Bennett, and
Matt Schlapp.
You all get a chance to come
back and weigh
in one more time -- or many more
times on
this.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Thanks very much.
LARA BROWN: Thank you.
KARINE JEAN-PIERRE: Thanks,
Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: As we heard,
there were vocal
opponents of the president,
thousands of them,
protesting across Washington
throughout the
day.
Most of them were peaceful.
But a number of incidents turned
violent late
this afternoon.
A limousine was set on fire
downtown.
Smoke could be seen for blocks
away.
And protesters hurled trash
cans, flash bombs
and objects at police, who used
pepper spray
in return.
By this evening, at least 217
people were
arrested.
Six police officers were
injured.
Jeffrey Brown and our team have
been out on
the streets all day.
Here's what they saw.
PROTESTERS: Hey, hey, ho, ho,
Donald Trump
has got to go!
JEFFREY BROWN: It was a
disparate group of
protesters coming together to
march, express
their resistance to the new
administration,
and air their anger at what some
see as an
illegitimate president.
WOMAN: I couldn't just sit at
home and let
this be -- like, Trump's
administration be
normalized.
JEFFREY BROWN: Robby Diesu is an
organizer
of one of the lead umbrella
groups called
DisruptJ20, Inauguration Day.
ROBBY DIESU, DisruptJ20: Our
goal is to disrupt
it, just like our name says.
And we have definitely been
disrupting it
all day.
JEFFREY BROWN: Disrupting, but
in a few moments
from now when we're talking,
Donald Trump
will be president.
ROBBY DIESU: Yes, but we were
not under impression
that we would stop him from
becoming president.
The point is to set a tone of
resistance from
the first moment that he is in
office.
JEFFREY BROWN: One act of
disruption, at security
checkpoints leading into the
National Mall,
demonstrators attempted to block
access to
the inauguration, chaining
themselves together
and refusing to move.
In another, protesters shut down
part of a
major highway near the Capitol.
McPherson Square in downtown
Washington, D.C.,
has been ground zero for
protesters all day.
From here, different groups have
fanned out
around the city, some marching
peacefully,
others more violent.
At times, the peaceful burst
into the violent.
After a tense standoff at 12th
and K Streets,
police used pepper spray and
flash grenades
to disperse the crowd.
Elsewhere, protesters dressed in
black threw
rocks and flash bombs and
smashed windows,
leading to more confrontations,
injuries and
arrests.
These demonstrators used tactics
associated
with so-called black bloc
anarchist groups,
long prevalent in Europe, often
seizing the
moment amid more peaceful
protests.
This afternoon, D.C.
Mayor Muriel Bowser said in a
statement: "Again,
I respect your right to
peacefully protest,
but the damage that has occurred
today is
unacceptable and not welcome in
D.C."
For most who came out, though,
today was a
day to come together and plan
for the future.
I spoke with this couple who
came from New
Hampshire.
WOMAN: There's a lot of folks
feel like they
are not heard, that they are not
represented,
that they -- their voices do not
matter any
way, shape, and/or form.
And it's just reminding folks
that even though
the -- he is president -- we
respect that
fact, because that fact is a
fact -- that
that doesn't mean that, over the
next eight
-- four to eight years, whatever
ends up happening,
that those voices won't matter,
that those
voices will not be a part of the
conversation,
that those thoughts and those
opinions will
not be a part of the
conversation.
I just wanted to make it a point
to say that
they will.
JEFFREY BROWN: The National Park
Service gave
out 22 permits for First
Amendment events,
considerably more than in
previous inaugurations,
when some half-dozen were
requested.
More than 3,000 police and 5,000
National
Guard were on hand, and security
expenses
for the day are expected to
exceed $100 million.
Protests today also occurred
well beyond Washington,
from marches in Denver to across
San Francisco's
Golden Gate Bridge, and around
the world.
In London, demonstrators
unfurled banners
from bridges with messages for
the new president,
among them, to build bridges,
not walls.
In Tokyo, hundreds of people,
most of them
women, marched in the night
streets in protest
of Mr. Trump's presidency.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Jeff joins me
now.
He's still in downtown
Washington.
Jeff, you have been there all
day.
Where do things stand right now?
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, I mean, you
can hear
all around me sirens in one
corner, a band
playing in another corner,
police off right
behind me.
It's been a very unusual day
here, Judy, in
Washington.
And it is an extremely unusual
evening.
It's calmer right now than it
was.
I'm standing actually right at
the spot.
We're right outside The
Washington Post.
This is where that limousine,
that car was
set on fire that you showed the
-- our audience
the video of from a little
earlier.
It's a little calmer now.
There is a very large security
presence now.
There is more protesters down at
the other
end.
And, actually, I see some flames
right there,
but I don't think that's a major
fire at the
moment, but we will watch that.
It's a little calmer, but -- and
we have been
told that, for most part, at
least the main
coalition groups are not
planning any more
activities tonight, but maybe
these smaller
groups that caused more of the
trouble.
And the thinking really is that
it is these
smaller groups that have caused
most of the
trouble.
You don't quite know what's
going to happen
with them later on, but, for the
most part,
I think we may have seen -- it's
a little
calmer now.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In just a few
seconds, Jeff,
we saw you talking to some of
the protesters.
Do you get the sense that they
feel their
message is being heard?
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, Judy, I
think it's more
about -- and I was listening to
the conversation
you were just having.
I think it's more about what's
next.
You know, where do they go from
here?
They wanted to make sure that
they were here,
that they were showing that they
exist, that
they have a message, and that
they can press
things ahead.
And it was about meeting people
and speaking
up and sort of organizing to see
where they
go from here.
But I think that, of course --
just as you
were saying with the guests
earlier, that's
really the big question for the
people on
the streets as well: What's
next?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Jeffrey Brown out
on the streets
all day long for the "NewsHour,"
thank you.
JEFFREY BROWN: All day, Judy.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Really fine
reporting.
We thank you.
JEFFREY BROWN: Thanks.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, since the
November election,
there has been a lot of talk
about how well
Mr. Trump connected with those
voters who
felt ignored or looked down upon
by politicians.
Today, they had their moment to
be heard.
Our Lisa Desjardins was on the
Mall to listen
to what some Trump supporters
had to say.
LISA DESJARDINS: They came from
across the
country, many at their first
inauguration,
on a gray day that didn't dampen
their excitement
and hope.
Marion Carpenter and Larry
Sanders drove up
from South Carolina yesterday.
MAN: We intend to follow him all
the way.
LISA DESJARDINS: They traveled
here with their
church group, they said,
because, before Trump,
they'd seen their way of life
disappearing.
MARION CARPENTER, Trump
Supporter: The steel
mills are gone.
The coal industry is gone.
People are hurting for jobs
LISA DESJARDINS: The crowd
didn't reach as
far down the National Mall as at
President
Obama's inaugurations, but it
was a devoted
group.
Joseph Zadeh's from Ohio hit on
a theme for
many Trump supporters, that
seeing President
Trump take office eased years of
personal
frustration.
JOSEPH ZADEH, Trump Supporter: I
started being
interested in politics midway
through Obama's
second term.
So, it's like, as a Republican,
it's being
told, oh, your ideas are stupid.
And, finally, look, we're here.
We're making America great
again.
MARILYN BYERS, Trump Supporter:
I'm a Marine
mom.
She's a Navy mom.
LISA DESJARDINS: Kelly Haisley
and Marilyn
Byers are from Indiana, friends
since high
school.
They drove nine hours to be
here.
To them, Mr. Trump represents a
change in
national priorities.
MARILYN BYERS: It's been a real
disappointment
for eight years, and it's time
that we get
back to grassroots and family
values.
We're going to make America...
KELLY HAISLEY, Trump Supporter:
Appreciating
our military.
MARILYN BYERS: Amen.
KELLY HAISLEY: I just don't feel
our troops
have been supported, and looking
forward to
them having a president and
commander in chief
that's going to do that for them
that loves
America,
LISA DESJARDINS: Here, too, were
some from
a Democratic base, unions, like
ironworker
Tom Dwyer, who fought back pain
to make it
here.
He's a New Yorker, like Mr.
Trump, and doesn't
trust politicians.
TOM DWYER, Trump Supporter: He's
a man of
his word.
I believe -- like I said, I grew
up in New
York, in Queens.
And he's just part of the
woodwork of New
York.
Well, when he says he's going to
do something,
I believe that he's going to do
it, and he's
going to make it shine.
LISA DESJARDINS: Most came for
Mr. Trump,
but many, like these Delaware
middle schoolers,
came just to witness the
peaceful transfer
of power itself.
Some of their parents admitted
they didn't
support the new president, but
told us their
trip was about more.
For the "PBS NewsHour" from the
National Mall
in Washington, I'm Lisa
Desjardins.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, in addition
to the protests
today, there are plans for much
more to come
tomorrow.
Women from around the country
are making their
way to the nation's capital,
with others preparing
for events in cities around the
globe.
The crowds on the National Mall
on Saturday
are expected to be in the
hundreds of thousands.
William Brangham recently sat
down at the
Newseum with two organizers of
tomorrow's
march, Bob Bland and Carmen
Perez.
William began by asking what
they hope to
accomplish.
BOB BLAND, Co-Chair, Women's
March on Washington:
We are bringing together women,
men and allies
from all different types of
communities from
all over the country to say that
we're standing
in solidarity together to say
that women's
rights are human rights.
CARMEN PEREZ, Co-Chair, Women's
March on Washington:
We are coming here so that we
could show this
new administration that we're
not going anywhere,
right?
And there are so many more of us
that are
actually united than we are
divided.
This March on Washington is to
ensure that
Congress, our new president and
the Senate
know that we're going to
continue to fight
for our rights, that we're going
to protect
the most marginalized
communities.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: What are you
marching for,
and what are you marching
against?
CARMEN PEREZ: So, we are
marching to continue
to allow women to make decisions
about their
bodies and ensure we have
reproductive justice
rights, immigration reform,
criminal justice
reform, as well as indigenous
rights.
So, there are so many things.
We have been extremely
intentional about allowing
organizations to get involved,
Planned Parenthood,
as well as Define American.
BOB BLAND: And every woman has
their own reason
for marching.
So, that's the really beautiful
thing about
this.
We have seen, through the last
18 months and
everything that's happened, that
we can be
complacent no longer.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: There are so
many specifics
in your guiding principles,
everything from
minimum wage, to reproductive
rights, to environmental
concerns, to indigenous people's
concerns.
Why was it important to you to
be so specific
in the things that you're
marching for?
CARMEN PEREZ: We wanted to make
sure that
there was a mission, there was a
vision, that
we started organizing for
something, not against
something, right?
So, this is not a march against
Trump.
This is a march on Washington,
Congress, the
Senate, our president.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: I hear what
you're saying,
that this is not against Trump,
but the timing
of it couldn't be more obvious.
Is there something about his
administration
that you guys are particularly
concerned about?
BOB BLAND: Well, we saw an
increase in this
country in instances of bigotry
and racism,
anti-Semitism, misogyny.
A lot of this came to the
forefront and these
conversations came to the
forefront during
the election cycle.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Some of the
guiding principles
that you have laid out seem to
really place
a lot of emphasis on the
concerns of women
of color, immigrant women.
Was that intentional?
CARMEN PEREZ: It was
intentional, especially
because our new president-elect
was attacking
a lot of these communities with
his -- some
of his racist rhetoric around
Mexicans and
building a wall.
And I'm Mexican-American myself.
Linda Sarsour, one of our
national co-chairs,
is Muslim American.
We need to have courageous
conversations.
Sometimes, we -- we don't speak
about religion
and politics and race because we
don't want
to offend anyone.
But how are we going to learn?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: It's hard to
talk about
these things.
CARMEN PEREZ: Right, exactly.
So, that's what this march has
been able to
do, is to create a very safe
space and an
honest space, where we could
have these difficult
-- quote, unquote --
"courageous" conversations,
so that we can move forward
together as a
country.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: What would you
say to a
young woman of color who has
heard about what
they might see at a feminist
march or a feminist
action in the past, and felt
excluded from
that, and they think, I'm not
going to do
this?
CARMEN PEREZ: What I would say
to a young
woman of color who doesn't feel
like this
march or even feminism has ever
been for them,
I would say, we need you.
BOB BLAND: Yes.
CARMEN PEREZ: We welcome you.
There's many moments where I
never saw somebody
like myself reflected in
leadership.
And that's why I have taken that
role now.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Is there any
concern that,
because this march is happening
the day after
Trump becomes president, and is
clearly targeted
in some ways at the Trump
administration,
that you might alienate a part
of the country
who may have supported Trump or
may have been
a Republican, or that you might
end up driving
people away because this is seen
as a partisan
day?
CARMEN PEREZ: I will say, we
welcome everybody
who actually supports women's
rights.
And so, if you are Republican,
if you are
a Democrat, if you are Green
Party, whatever
party you are, we welcome you to
be a part
of this.
And so I believe that there are
many women
who voted for Trump who are also
coming, and
families.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: You think
that's right?
You think you're going to have
women who support
Trump that will be here on
Saturday?
CARMEN PEREZ: I believe, you
know, that people
who feel connected to women's
rights are going
to be there.
BOB BLAND: And I think that
there are many,
many conservative women who
didn't vote for
Trump.
And they have been e-mailing us
and saying,
yes, we want to stand in
solidarity against
misogyny and for our rights as
women.
And so I think it's a moment
where we can
look at, what does it mean to be
conservative,
are you Republican or are you
Democrat, and
that's it.
I think we're all people first.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: How will you
measure whether
or not Saturday is a success?
BOB BLAND: For us, this impact
will be something
that reverberates across the
country and across
the world for quite a while.
And, so, you know, we will see
what the long-term
impact of it is.
But I think that's also up to
the marchers.
I think it's up to them to take
their power
and use it.
CARMEN PEREZ: I agree.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Do you think
Donald Trump
will be watching?
BOB BLAND: I think he will be
tweeting.
(LAUGHTER)
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right, Bob
Bland, Carmen
Perez, thank you both very much.
BOB BLAND: Thanks.
CARMEN PEREZ: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The new president
is already
weighing in on some policy
matters.
Within minutes of the
swearing-in today, the
White House Web site carried new
statements.
One promised a -- quote --
"state-of-the-art
missile defense system to
protect against
attacks from states like Iran
and North Korea."
Another condemned what it called
the "dangerous
anti-police atmosphere in
America," and promised
it will end.
At the same time, the Web site
dropped all
mention of climate change.
The inauguration also
reverberated around
the world.
In Moscow, Russians welcomed the
new president
with posters, special sales and
parties, anticipating
better relations with the U.S.
And in a statement, Pope Francis
urged President
Trump to -- quote -- "be guided
by the rich
spiritual values that have
shaped the history
of the American people,"
especially, he said,
concern for the poor.
Meanwhile, the U.S. Senate late
this afternoon
confirmed the first of Mr.
Trump's Cabinet
nominees.
Former Marine General James
Mattis was approved
as secretary of defense.
And John Kelly, another former
Marine general,
won confirmation to head the
Department of
Homeland Security.
The Mexican drug lord "El Chapo"
Guzman pleaded
not guilty today in New York to
federal drug
trafficking charges.
He was extradited yesterday from
Mexico, after
twice escaping from prison
there.
Federal prosecutors in Brooklyn
said today
that it's time he faced justice.
ROBERT CAPERS, U.S. Attorney:
Guzman's destructive
and murderous rise as an
international narcotics
trafficker is akin to that of a
small, cancerous
tumor that metastasized, and
grew into a full-blown
scourge that, for decades,
littered the streets
of Mexico with the casualties of
violent drug
wars over turf.
And the same scourge helped to
perpetrate
the drug epidemic here in the
U.S.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mexican officials
said the
timing of the extradition was
not related
to the inauguration of President
Trump.
In Central Italy, a dramatic
scene played
out, as rescue crews found 10
people alive
in a resort hotel crushed by an
avalanche.
They are among some 30 people
thought to be
trapped after the massive
snowslide on Wednesday.
Workers captured the moment
today that two
survivors were pulled from the
snow, one of
them a young boy amid cheers
from the crews.
MARCO BINI, Rescue Worker
(through translator):
They survived thanks to this
bubble of air
that formed inside the hotel.
Finding them was really tough,
because not
only were we working in the
middle of the
debris, but we also had snow to
deal with.
It's like an earthquake in the
snow.
It's hard to describe.
It's something unbelievable.
It's awful.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So far, the crews
have also
found four bodies.
There is word that the defeated
president
of Gambia has agreed to step
aside, apparently
ending a political crisis.
Officials in neighboring Senegal
say final
arrangements are still being
worked out.
Senegal and other West African
states had
sent in troops to force Yahya
Jammeh to give
up.
The man who beat him in last
month's election,
Adama Barrow, says what he terms
Jammeh's
rule of fear is over.
In economic news, China's growth
last year
was the slowest since 1990.
Beijing reported today that the
growth rate
ran at 6.7 percent.
And, on Wall Street, the Dow
Jones industrial
average broke a five-day losing
streak, and
gained nearly 95 points today to
close at
19827.
The Nasdaq rose 15, and the S&P
500 added
seven.
It is up 6 percent since the
election.
Finally tonight: As former
President Obama
now embarks on life after the
White House,
flying to California for
vacation, few people
had as intimate a view of him as
the man tasked
with taking his picture.
John Yang is back with that
story.
JOHN YANG: For the past eight
years, Pete
Souza has watched history
through the viewfinder
of his camera.
PETE SOUZA, Former Chief
Official White House
Photographer: To walk into the
Oval Office
every day, to walk along the
Colonnade to
photograph this man every day
has just been
a unique experience.
JOHN YANG: He was behind the
scenes for world-changing
events, like the May afternoon
in 2011 when
U.S. special forces killed Osama
bin Laden.
PETE SOUZA: This was in the
Situation Room.
You can see in the faces how
tense this was
to watch.
The interesting thing to me is,
you can see
the brigadier general that is
sitting in what
would be considered the
president's chair.
And he stood up to give the
president his
chair.
And the president's like, "No,
no, no, you
stay where you're at, because
you're in control
here.
And I will just pull up a
chair."
JOHN YANG: There were days of
sadness, like
preparing for the 2012 prayer
service for
the young victims of the
Newtown, Connecticut,
school shooting.
It meant President Obama would
miss his own
daughter's dance recital.
Instead, he went to her dress
rehearsal.
PETE SOUZA: Sasha's
participation was, I think,
in three of the 16 performances.
So, when she was dancing, he was
totally focused
on watching her.
And then, when she left the
stage and other
people were dancing, he was
editing his speech.
And you can see just the -- that
little subtle
look on his face.
He's still very emotional.
JOHN YANG: Emotions that would
touch Souza
as well.
PETE SOUZA: Newtown was the one
time where
I had tears.
It was very difficult to watch
him greet these
families.
Just imagine all of them meeting
the president
for the first time in the worst
of circumstances.
And I would say that was the one
time where,
emotionally, I couldn't hide how
I was feeling.
JOHN YANG: And you're not just
capturing the
moments of history, the big
moments of the
presidency.
You're capturing the small,
human moments
as well.
PETE SOUZA: And, to me, those
are my -- probably
my favorite moments is little
unexpected gems,
as I call them, that happen on
occasion.
JOHN YANG: Like this otherwise
routine Oval
Office meeting with a departing
staff member
and his family.
PETE SOUZA: The man's son Jacob
asked the
president if he could feel his
head, because
his friends had told him that he
had the exact
same haircut as the president.
So, President Obama just kind of
leaned down,
and Jacob feels his head, and
click.
Over the years, this had kind of
taken on
somewhat of an iconic status,
just because
it showed the kind of person he
is, meaning
President Obama.
JOHN YANG: Did you have any
sense that it
would because so iconic, so
symbolic?
PETE SOUZA: Absolutely not.
(LAUGHTER)
PETE SOUZA: Even after we posted
it on WhiteHouse.gov,
I just didn't realize how
significant it would
become.
JOHN YANG: It's one of many
images Souza has
captured of Mr. Obama with
children.
PETE SOUZA: I feel the joy and
the disbelief
that the president of the United
States is
lying on the rug of the Oval
Office, hoisting
up a little girl in her elephant
costume.
There's that picture of him
flexing muscles
with Superman, or getting zapped
by Spider-Man.
JOHN YANG: Were you surprised
when he sort
of flies back when Spider-Man
slings the web?
PETE SOUZA: Sure.
I mean, it's, like, completely
unexpected.
And I always tell people that
the only pressure
of my job is to make sure I'm
ready for those
moments, and try not to mess
them up.
JOHN YANG: After two terms, the
president
jokes about his graying hair,
but Souza says
the man he sees through his
camera lens has
been constant.
PETE SOUZA: You know, I have got
to say that
the core character of this man
has not changed
one iota.
I mean, I think he's still the
same person
he was that I met in January of
2005, when
he was first elected to the
Senate.
Has he gotten older?
Well, sure, but this is what
happens, not
just to a president.
But, in terms of, like, his
character, I honestly
don't think he has changed at
all.
JOHN YANG: For the "PBS
NewsHour," I'm John
Yang at the White House.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Whatever your
political views,
you have to admire those photos.
And you can watch our entire
series The Obama
Years, in which we spoke to many
leaders in
the outgoing administration.
That's on our Web site,
PBS.org/NewsHour.
On the "NewsHour" online right
now, hear the
voices of the inauguration.
We talked to seven Americans who
are in Washington
during the transfer of power to
observe, to
celebrate or protest the
beginning of the
Trump administration.
Plus, you can also read the full
transcript
of President Trump's
inauguration speech,
and find a fact-check of his
statements.
You can test your knowledge with
our inauguration
trivia quiz.
And follow along on our live
blog for news,
analysis and photos of all this
big day's
events.
That and much more on this day
of change is
on our Web site,
PBS.org/NewsHour.
Later tonight on PBS on
"Washington Week":
a closer look at how the new
Trump administration's
policy proposals may change the
lives of average
Americans.
That's later tonight on
"Washington Week."
And this weekend on "PBS
NewsHour Weekend":
continuing coverage of President
Trump's first
days in office, the Women's
March on Washington,
and candid conversations with
exiting members
of Congress.
And we will be back right here
on Monday.
You can count on it.
That's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
What an incredible day.
Have a great weekend.
Thank you, and good night.